Hello and welcome to this lesson where we're going to be continuing where we left off in the previous
lesson by diving a bit deeper into working with variables in C++.
Now variables can be changed at runtime meaning at any point in our code after a variable has been declared
we can assign a new value to it.
And this actually lives up to the definition of the word variable.
If you were to grab a dictionary and look up variable you would likely see a definition that could be
summarized to something like a value that is subject to change.
So do take note that we can change the value of a variable after it's been declared and initialized
in our code.
So we declare our a, b, and c variables here and initialize them the sum of my variables comes to 9
and the product comes to 24.
Now take note of your own sum and product values and let's take a look at how we can assign a new value
to one of our variables below where we declare a, b, and c but above where we declare the sum and the
product.
Let's add in a couple of lines.
So to assign a value to a variable that's already been declared.
We can type out the variable name.
I noticed that my code here is slightly offset.
We need to indent it.
I'm going to come to the start of a line and hit tab.
So we need to start with the variable name so I'm starting with "a" here and then to assign a new value.
We can simply add a space and then an equal sign and the equal sign here that equals symbol is an assignment
operator.
After our assignment operator we can add a space and put in the value that we want "a" to have.
So we can change it to 7 let's say, I'm gonna put a semicolon here to finish off the line and now if
we compile our code and run the program.
Make sure you save your work before compiling.
We can see that we have a different result now being out posted to the terminal.
This is because we've assigned a new value to "a" after we've declared and initialized it.
Now there's a reason I told you to write this line here.
Let's just take it out for the time being and let's take a look at what happens if we assign a value
to one of our variables.
After we declare the sum in the product so I'm gonna put b and assign a value of 8 to it and use the
semicolon to finish off the line.
So save your work compile your code and run your program.
And we could see that we're back to our original values here.
So what's going on.
Well we are assigning a new value to our b variable after our sum and products have been declared it's
already been calculated here is it by the time we get down to our B variable and assign it a new value
the sum and the products will not take this value into account because it's below where they get initialized.
So let's remove this line again.
Now it's important to note that we cannot assign a value to a variable before it's been declared because
the compiler will not even be aware that such a variable exists and the compiler will actually prevent
our program from being compiled it will throw up an error.
Let's take a look at this now above where we declare our a, b, and c variables that we can add in some
new lines and let's just try assign a new value to c here.
So I'm going to type in C and insert the assignment operator and assign a new value let's say 10 and
with a semicolon to finish the line off if we save and compile.
We can see we get an error.
It says C undeclared identifier the compiler doesn't know what C is.
Now let's just remove this line and let's just summarize this.
We never want to assign values to variables before the variable has been declared.
The compiler will not allow it because the compiler will not be aware that the variable exists.
Now what if we never want variables to change our code.
I want you to try something for each variable you've declared in your code.
I want you to prefix it with the keyword const just like this.
Now I don't expect you to fully understand what this does But head over to the community forum and be
brave and post what you think const means and how it affects our code.
Just share your thoughts in the community and then once you've done all of this we can explore this
together.
Okay so I've added const to the start of each line of code where we declare a variable.
Now what does this mean.
Well const is a keyword that instructs the compiler to never allow the values of our variables to change
at any point in our code.
Let's try this out.
If we try to assign a new value to one of our variables and compile our code after saving it we can
see that the compiler throws up an error.
It says error and it's tells us the variable name here.
And it says you cannot assign to a variable that is const so why would you do this.
Well really it protects you from yourself and it makes your intentions with your variables very clear.
When we use the const keyword at the start of a line where we declare a variable we are signaling
to ourselves and to any other programmers who read our code that we never want this variable to change
its value after it's been declared and initialized and the compiler is like our best friend here because
it will always throw up an error when we try to compile our code if it finds that a variable marked with
const is being changed anywhere in our code.
So if you never wanted variables value to change after you've declared and initialize it, mark it with
const. That's what we're going to do here because we don't actually want any of the variables we've declared
so far to have new values assigned to them after they've been initialized.
So we can finish this lesson by removing this line of code here and we can feel comfortable knowing
that our variables are well protected.
So that wraps up this lesson.
And when you're ready I'll see you in the next one.